Welcome.
We're going to have session 136,
Sound and Networking for Games.
I'd like to welcome you all.
David Hill and Todd Previt will
be giving this presentation.
We're going to do a tag
team event right here.
I think David's going to lead it off
talking about some sound and specific
sound and games issues and talking about
both core graphics and sound manager.
Then Todd will follow up.
We're talking about networking,
talking about all the various networking
services we have across the OS for games.
Without further ado,
David Hill for of sound.
So as Jeff mentioned, Todd and I will be
splitting this session.
I'm going to start out,
give you kind of a brief overview of the
APIs that we have available on Mac OS X.
and cover some of your options,
cover a little bit about how to
set up and initialize each one.
Then talk briefly about how to play back,
you know, sound sample,
that's actually going
to be in core audio,
and talk about MP3 playback.
And for that I'll leverage QuickTime to
do the one-page MP3 player.
Then Todd's going to come up a
little later and talk about a number
of different networking issues,
BSD sockets, addressing,
setup and initialization,
and some of the network technologies
you might want to look into
using for your games on Mac OS X.
And finally,
finish up with some tips and tricks.
So as far as the technologies
we're going to cover today,
as I said, I'm going to start out with
the Carbon Sound Manager,
tell you a little bit about
what's changed and what hasn't.
I'm going to talk briefly
about QuickTime and Core Audio,
and then Todd's going to
be covering Open Transport,
NetSprocket, OpenPlay,
and some BSD sockets.
BSD Sockets
So the Carbon Sound Manager.
We brought the Sound Manager across
from Mac OS 8 and 9 to help
make your jobs a lot easier.
It's callable both from CFM and Mako,
which makes it really nice since
you can create a CFM app that
uses the Carbon Sound Manager that
For the most part,
with no real changes at all,
we'll run on 8 and 9,
and it will also run on Mac OS X.
It's also accessible
from Carbon and Cocoa.
So, Cocoa has its own NSSound class,
but if for some reason you already
have Carbon Sound Manager code or you
need a little bit more control than
NSSound gives you or what have you,
you can actually call it from Cocoa.
That works just fine.
One of the new things we've
added as far as Mac OS X is the
Carbon Sound Manager actually now
supports variable bitrate decoding.
That's a big issue for
MP3s and things like that,
where they start to try to actually vary
the bitrate to improve the compression
that you get with your sounds.
However, we have had to remove several
APIs for one reason or another.
Probably the biggest one that
we've heard people complain about
is the SoundPlay Double Buffer.
A number of people were using that
one to do a real easy ping pong back
and forth between two sound buffers.
That one is no longer present
in the Carbon Sound Manager.
In order to help you,
for those of you that
were using that API,
we've got a very good sample called
the Carbon SoundPlay Double Buffer.
I encourage you to check that out.
It's on the SampleCode website,
developer.apple.com/samplecode,
probably under the sound section there.
It's a pretty good sample.
It explains how to use the
Carbon Sound Manager and
some other APIs to do pretty
much the same thing that the
SoundPlay Double Buffer did before.
We've also removed some
of the disk-based APIs,
the ones that play directly from
a file and things like that.
And wavetable synthesis
is no longer there,
for an example.
For the really curious among you,
there are some other changes
under the hood between Mac OS 8
and 9 and Mac OS X that your app
probably shouldn't care about.
But I thought I'd mention them for
those of you that are interested.
On Mac OS 8 and 9, the sound manager was
this big global thing.
It was actually only
one on the whole system.
And the hardware model was provided
by the sound manager itself.
It had to know about all the different
sound hardware on every single machine
and figure out what machine you were
running on and do the right thing.
On Mac OS X, however,
the sound manager is per process.
And in talking to the audio guys,
it shouldn't make any
difference to your app.
Pretty much you're either changing, say,
the volume on a sound channel,
which is local to your app,
or you're changing the global volume,
which is still global.
So you shouldn't really
care about that one either.
Another interesting point is
the hardware model on Mac OS X,
the Carbon sound manager is actually
a layer on top of core audio.
So that will introduce a
slight performance hit,
perhaps.
But again, your app shouldn't really
care one way or the other.
So I thought I'd step through just
real briefly for those that haven't
seen the Carbon Sound Manager,
want to know what it looks like.
We can step through a little bit of code.
Really just a few slides here.
So one important thing you need to have
if you're using the buffer and callback
scheme is you need a sound callback.
And I've prototyped it
up there at the top.
It takes the sound channel
parameter and the sound command.
And then when you actually
want to create a channel,
the channel is the thing that
you actually send your sound
commands to to play your buffers.
You pass it a pointer to a sound channel,
you pass it,
in this case we're telling it
we want to send sampled sound,
we want a stereo channel,
and then we pass in that callback.
When you get ready to play a sound,
you need to tell the sound manager
what format that sound is in.
So in this case,
we're filling out a header structure.
Then these are just some of
the interesting parameters.
You have a pointer to the
sound data you're playing,
how many channels are in that sound data,
the sample rate,
and we also tell it that this
is an extended sound header,
which lets you do some additional things.
You can set the base frequency.
I think number of frames is an
extended sound manager thing.
Samples per buffer and sample size.
So we're playing 16-bit stereo,
44 kilohertz sound in this case.
So once you've got the channel set
up and you've got the header set up,
you need to actually send those
commands to the sound channel.
And the first block of code there,
we set up what's called a buffer command.
So the buffer command simply
tells the sound manager,
here's a block of sound data
that I want you to play.
And we pass the header,
pointed to the header that we've
just created that describes in
detail the format of the sound.
And we pass that to the sound
channel with the sound do command.
The second block of code there,
in order to know when that
buffer of sound is completed,
so that you can queue up
the next buffer of sound,
you can pass in a callback command.
I believe we have a bunch
of samples that do this.
QuickTime does this
kind of sound playing.
You pass in a callback command,
the parameters don't really matter,
and you pass that to the sound channel
through much the same as you did before.
One interesting thing to note,
and this confused me at first when
I first started looking at this API,
you're giving it a callback command,
but you're not telling
it what to callback.
If you remember,
we actually passed that in
when we created the channel.
One sound callback is set per channel.
It's not per callback command.
You have to have all your callbacks
on a particular channel go through
one actual callback function.
And then once you're
done with the channel,
after you've sent a number of buffers,
played whatever you want to,
don't forget to dispose it.
So moving on to QuickTime.
I'll put in a little plug
for QuickTime here since
this is a game session.
QuickTime is really good for complicated
sound data like MP3s and MIDIs.
They do all the heavy lifting for you.
But it's also really good
for still image loading.
Anybody that saw Jeff's 2D,
high performance 2D OpenGL talk,
he uses QuickTime to
do the image loading.
So he doesn't care what format it's in.
He just says QuickTime,
let me load in this image,
whatever format, JPEG, BMP,
whatever format.
PNG, whatever.
And QuickTime does all that work for him,
puts it into a buffer.
Then he can hand that directly
to OpenGL as a texture.
So it's really good for that.
It's especially a good way to get some
things prototyped and up and running.
If you want to do your
own graphic format later,
you can.
But at least to get you started,
QuickTime is a great way to get started.
And of course, movie playing.
Of course, QuickTime is famous for that.
But I thought I'd throw
it on there anyway.
So as promised,
here's a one-page MP3 player.
To get QuickTime started, enter movies.
And in this case,
we've passed it in a file spec
of the file we want to play.
And in my demo code that
I'll show you in a minute,
we actually just use Nav Services,
get us a file, pass it in here.
We open the movie file,
say create a movie from the file.
And that will give us for that refnum
that we get out of open movie file,
it will give us a movie.
And then we'll fill out
the movie structure that we
can pass to the other APIs.
And then deploy it.
Really simple.
We start the movie.
As long as a movie is not done,
we call MoviesTask.
Then when we're done,
we dispose the movie,
close the movie file, and exit movies.
We're done.
It's all it takes to play an MP3.
Really simple stuff.
I'll prove it.
We can go to the Demo 2 machine.
This is a real simple app,
essentially the basic
Carbon template from Project Builder.
Threw in pretty much
that code you saw there.
Now there are some more
in-depth samples on our website
again for how to play MP3s.
If you want some more control over
how it's decoded and how it's played,
check out our sample code site.
I know there's some that more directly
use the Carbon Sound Manager and
QuickTime together to play
some more detailed things.
Let's go back to the slides.
Thank you.
Let's talk about the new guy, Core Audio.
So the number of Core Audio sessions,
I think one has already occurred
and two more are coming up.
I'll tell you about them in a little bit.
But I wanted to go over kind of a
high-level look at Core Audio so
that you could get a feel for
what it is and whether you should
be looking at it for your game.
So Core Audio is a pretty
low-level interface.
It provides a number of capabilities
built into the architecture.
Some of these are ready to go now.
Some of them haven't been exposed yet.
But for one, audio device sharing.
Of course, you want to make it easy for
different devices to share,
different processes to
share the same device.
If you have, say,
an MP3 player playing and your game
comes up and wants to be playing audio
and then the system wants to beep to
tell you something important happens,
everything has to be able to share it.
In the example code that
I'll show you in a bit,
we just pretty much ask Core Audio for
the default output device.
We say,
whatever sound goes to by default,
that's cool for us.
There are other calls that you can
use to get more interesting info,
actually get a list of the
different audio devices available,
things like that.
Core Audio also provides some
facilities for real-time audio
inter-process communication.
And that would essentially
let multiple processes sort of
pipe audio data between them.
So if you had one app that was generating
some audio and you wanted to send it to,
say, an app that was recording that
in some format or whatever,
you could actually chain them together.
And that's on a process basis.
They also have a lower level,
what they call the audio
unit and component model,
where you can actually have
audio processing units and string
them together within your app.
So you might, in your app,
create a reverb unit and
some other units together,
chain them together,
and then start sending audio through it.
One of the other interesting
things about Qua Audio is it's
designed with low latency.
It's supposed to be able to handle
really low latency and also synchronize
output between different sounds.
And one interesting note there
is you can actually control,
for the most part,
the latency in your app.
Unlike the sound manager,
with core audio you can actually
set for a given device what
you want the buffer size to be.
And on 9 there was always a big
problem between VM on and VM off for
games and the Carbon sound manager,
or actually just the
regular sound manager.
With VM on, the system would make
the buffer much bigger.
And so if you decided to
change what you were playing,
you'd have to wait for that
buffer to complete before
the next buffer got going.
On core audio, on Mac OS X,
that's not a problem.
You can set the buffer as
big or as small as you want.
Now one gotcha with core audio is that
core audio uses floating point samples.
Now that does greatly simplify
your application code,
especially in the demo I'll
show you where we're generating
tones and things like that.
It's really easy to generate,
but it does make the drivers work
a little bit harder because the
existing hardware we have right now
sends integer data to the cards.
Also, if you're coming from, say,
a conversion where you have wave
sounds and some things like that
coming from Windows or some other
platform that are 8 or 16 bit integers,
You're probably going to have to
convert your samples on the fly,
or you can pre-convert them
and store them on disk.
[Transcript missing]
So, in the Carbon Sound Manager,
you got sound samples into
the system using the buffer
commands and the callbacks.
That was your basic mechanism for
getting sound into that system.
With Core Audio,
You deal with these
things called I/O procs.
And so for a given device,
you can install one or more
Ioprox.
And your Ioprox, when they get called,
get a number of very
interesting parameters.
They get a number of timestamps.
As I mentioned,
Core Audio was designed so that you
could actually synchronize audio.
Well,
if you're going to synchronize audio,
you need to know a lot of stuff,
like what time is it now,
as far as the sound system is concerned,
and when are you going to play this
sound that I'm getting ready to hand you.
You've asked me to fill this buffer.
When's that buffer actually
going to get played?
So you get that information.
You'll get some input buffers back.
As the name implies,
it's both input and output, Brock.
So you get some input buffers
if the device is actually
needing to send you data.
That's where that will come in.
And then there's a chunk of
output buffers that you can
use to put your samples in and
send the data out to the card.
That last bullet there,
if you need to know
what the stream is like,
you need to know how many channels or
sample rate and those kinds of things,
you can actually make a call to get the
KAudioDevicePropertyStream configuration.
Yet another API with really long names.
You can make this call and it will
fill out a structure for you that will
give you very detailed information
about what this I/O proc is going
to get and what the stream is like.
Now for the people that
are really curious,
we can go into how the actual
audio gets to the device.
For each device on the system,
there's one real-time Mach thread
that's pretty high priority.
And it takes care of actually calling
all the IOPROCs when the system
needs to move stuff back and forth.
And essentially that device
starts that thread up with
the first IOPROC you install.
As soon as you activate the
device with the first IOPROC,
the device is up and this thread's
running and calling your IOPROC.
And the thread stays running until you
actually remove your last IOPROC and
then it shuts back down again.
So let's look a little bit at
what that thread looks like.
This is some real high-level pseudo code.
Essentially it loops until it's done.
It sleeps until it has something to do.
It can tell when the next input
or output needs to happen.
It sleeps until then.
Then it looks to see if the device
has input coming back into the system.
If it does,
it will calculate exactly when that
input was sampled and then copy
that data into the input buffers to
get ready to hand to the I/O procs.
Then it says, okay,
does the device have output?
Has somebody installed an
I/O proc to send data out?
Okay, well,
let's calculate when that output
is actually going to be sent.
Clear out the output buffers to
prepare for calling the I/O procs.
And then call all the I/O procs
that are installed for this device.
As I mentioned,
a particular process can install
more than one and you can have
multiple processes sharing a device,
so there might be a number of
I/O procs actually installed here.
Once it's called all the I/O procs,
you've got, say,
a handful of I/O procs that
have filled out their buffers.
Somebody's got to mix them to send
them out to the output stream.
That's when Core Audio comes
along and actually mixes all
those I/O proc buffers together.
And then it sends it out to
the card and loops back around.
So it spends its entire lifetime
just gathering the input,
clearing the buffers,
getting the-- out and calling I/O procs
and then sending the data out.
Let's look at some code.
This is the basic idea.
If you're a Carbon CFM app,
You've got to load
Core Audio by CFBundle.
Core Audio is not available from CFM.
So there's some good sample code
on the web at our sample code site,
and actually in the
CarbonLib SDK as well,
about how to call CFM,
or how to call Mako routines from CFM.
Once you've got access
to the Core Audio system,
you can make some calls to
gather device information.
You can set up the device
properties the way you want them,
make sure the buffer size
is correct and everything.
You add in your IOD proc,
and then you start the device.
And as soon as you start the device,
it starts calling your
I/O proc asking for data.
So a brief diversion
into the bundle APIs.
If you have a URL, say,
to the Core Audio Bundle,
and this applies to any framework bundle,
you can get a reference for the
bundle using CFBundleCreate.
You load the executable for that
bundle to make sure it's in memory.
Then you can get a function pointer for,
in this case,
some non-existent CA func name
is the name of the function.
You get a function pointer for that
using CFBundleGetFunctionPointerForName.
Hard to miss what that does.
Once you've got access to that API,
then you need to start calling them.
So you can call audio
hardware get property.
And in this case, we're asking it for the
default output device.
Core Audio guys recommend you actually
use the default output device,
unless you have a specific reason not to.
If you want to actually look
at the APIs and query for the
different output devices you can.
But this one will be a real
easy way to just tell you,
"Okay, what's the basic output device
that I need to use?" This will
give you an output device ID.
From there you can get and
set some properties on it.
As I mentioned before,
you could get the configuration
for the stream and things.
In this case, all we need to do is,
we just want to say we need k samples
per buffer and each sample is a float,
so we set that buffer size in there.
I don't even remember
what I used in my code.
Then we have to install our I/O proc.
And the I/O proc is actually
mostly input parameters.
The top two-thirds there
is the parameter list.
And as you can see, you get a device ID.
So you can actually have the same
proc installed on multiple devices.
So this will tell you which device
is actually asking for data.
You get the timestamp from
the audio system to say,
here's what time it is now.
The input data and the input timestamp
when that data was actually sampled.
Then you have the ones that I've
highlighted there that are more
interesting for our discussion.
The output data,
the time when that data is
actually going to be played,
and some client data that
you can actually pass in when
you install the I/O proc.
And then down there at the
bottom I put just a real simple,
you know, for each sample frame,
you know,
the frame being left and right stereo,
whatever.
For each sample frame, for each channel,
either the left channel
or the right channel,
fill in that output data buffer there.
Once you've got your I/O proc installed,
all you have to do is start the device.
So you say start the
device with that I/O proc.
A caveat here, as soon as you call this,
it's going to start
calling your I/O proc.
So beware,
make sure that you don't do this and then
expect to be able to set up a few more
structures or whatever for the I/O proc.
It's already going to call you,
so be ready for it.
So let's take a look
at a simple demo here.
And my colleagues have voted this
the most annoying demo at WWDC.
So we'll show you the simple tone demo.
Let's make that a little softer.
So here we have...
So this is a simple Cocoa app
that I wired up in...
Not too long, big plug for Cocoa here.
Really easy stuff to play with.
Good for prototyping
This one we can play a little bit
more with some other things you
learned in music theory class.
Simply generating the
waveform on the fly,
some simple sine waves, square waves,
sawtooth.
Really easy stuff.
We'll be posting the sample
code in the next week,
probably, so you can take a good look
at how to use core audio,
get some real simple stuff going,
and annoy your neighbor.
Especially for those of
you that work in cubes.
I was actually working on that
app a little bit during Jeff's
OpenGL early bird session,
Okay.
So to wrap this up, real quick,
high level, you know,
we've talked about several
different interfaces.
Core Audio and Sound Manager are
great if you've got raw sound samples
that you just want to throw out,
get out to the card, play them.
If you've got something more
complicated like MIDI or MP3,
QuickTime is a really easy way
to get that up and running.
Take a look at the API.
It's really simple.
If you want to do the heavy lifting,
you can,
but QuickTime already has done an awful
lot of work to get that nice and neat.
So you might want to take a
look at the QuickTime API.
And coming up, actually, luckily,
there's still two audio sessions
coming up in this very room at 3.30.
We've got the audio processing
and sequencing services.
And then for those of you that are more
interested in some of the more powerful
MIDI services that Mac OS X provides,
at 5 o'clock in this room,
we've got 2.10 MIDI on Mac OS X.
And then since this is a game session,
if you have games feedback for us,
if we're doing something well,
if we're not doing something well,
if there's something you'd
like to see more of or less of,
what have you,
please come to the feedback forum in J1,
which is next door,
and give us our games feedback
on games technologies.
And that's it for my part.
Now I'll turn it over to Todd.
Where did Todd go?
There he is.
Thank you.
He wasn't kidding about those demos,
was he?
Hi, my name's Todd Previt.
I'm the 3D graphics and de
facto networking DTS engineer.
So I'm going to recap one of the things
that one of David's slides went over,
which is what we're going to
learn about networking today.
I'm going to go through
BSD sockets in the most detail,
including accessing it from both
CFM and Carbon and from Cocoa.
Then I'm going to go through some
simple setup and initialization code.
I'm also going to discuss some
of the networking technologies
that are available on 10 that
are better suited to gaming as
opposed to things like URL access,
which is more designed for
mainstream applications.
I'm going to go through some tips
and tricks for network gaming.
It's kind of a misnomer.
It's more like a porting guide,
kind of give you some idea
of how things map over to 10.
So what do we have for networking on 10?
Well, first of all,
there's Carbon Open Transport.
As that name would imply,
Open Transport has been
carbonized for OS X.
It's all there,
all the functionality that you need.
And that is one of the
options you can use.
NetSprocket Open Play,
we've gotten a lot of questions
about this very recently.
And NetSprocket and Open Play are
now also available on Mac OS X.
And of course, there's Sockets,
which which is available
in the BSD layer.
So OpenTransport's available on 10 mainly
as an easy path for existing applications
to move over to Mac OS X from OS 8 and 9.
Again, as I said,
all of the functionality
of OS 9 is there,
so you don't have to worry about, well,
what are the differences?
The whole thing has been taken and
just pulled right over directly.
The OpenTransport frameworks are
all built on top of sockets now,
as opposed to whichever
underlying layer they used on 9.
I don't know offhand.
This has been included for
API compatibility only.
There's no additional functionality that
you get from OpenTransport on Mac OS X.
Open Transport uses threads to
emulate any of the asynchronous mode
stuff that was available on OS 9.
You do incur about a 10% performance
hit for using Open Transport as
opposed to using sockets directly.
And the protocol subset that is
supported by Open Transport on 10
is much smaller than it was on 9,
supporting only TCP IP, DDP, ZIP,
and NBP for Apple Talk.
OpenPlay Netsproket is a derivative,
well, not a derivative,
but it's the evolution of
Netsproket from traditional Mac OS.
Apple open sourced it some time back,
and since then it's kind of
developed into two different areas,
that being OpenPlay and
Netsproket itself.
They are both open source APIs.
They are now cross-platform,
available Mac and Windows.
I believe there was a Linux Unix
version that was supposed to be coming,
but I couldn't find much
information on that.
And it also has been
carbonized from Mac OS X.
So with Netsprocket,
what they did was they made it the
high-level interface that is now,
instead of built on top of OpenTransport,
I believe is what Netsprocket
used to be based on,
it now sits on top of their own API,
which is OpenPlay,
which I'll discuss in just a few minutes.
It does maintain most of the
API compatibility with NetSprocket,
although as I understand there are
some differences between the two.
No new documentation is
available for NetSprocket,
but you can still use the 173, I believe,
is the current version of NetSprocket
documentation that is available.
That is still the most current.
So what exactly is OpenPlay?
OpenPlay is the low-level interface
that they've developed for use
on both Windows and Macintosh.
It's sort of akin to sockets in
that it doesn't have a lot of...
One of these days I'll think of the words
that I'm trying to come up with here.
It's fairly streamlined, fairly simple,
and there's just not a lot
to it as far as being overly
friendly with a user interface.
They left most of that
functionality up to Netsprocket.
It's been called a
network module manager.
So what exactly is a
network module manager?
It's a protocol manager.
You tell it which protocols you want to
use and what you want to do with them.
It sets them up and then you can
access them either directly through
the open play calls or you can go
through the high level NetSprocket
interface and access them that way.
provides three basic services,
which is configuration, data transfer,
and enumeration.
Now, in the documentation it says it
also provides human interface
and miscellaneous functions,
but neither one of those I could
find a whole lot of information on.
I think the user--the human interface
they're referring to was Netsprocket,
but again,
couldn't find much out on that.
Configuration-wise, just as I said,
it'll set up the protocol stacks for you.
You can do all your initialization
right through Open Play,
just as you can through sockets.
Data transfer,
it's what communicates with the drivers,
with all the network drivers,
sends it down to the hardware
and spits it out on the wire.
And enumeration,
it will go through all of the
available network interfaces,
including any sort of serial
dial-up or Ethernet interfaces.
It will enumerate them for you so you
can select whichever one you want to use.
This is kind of a graphical
representation of how OpenPlay and
NetSprocket function together,
with the high-level interface sitting
on top of the Network Module Manager,
and Network Module Manager calling down
into the various protocol stacks and
device interfaces that are available.
There's a little more
information on OpenPlay.
The URL is for Apple's
open source website.
You can access it right there.
There is a complete set of documentation.
Well, okay.
Not exactly complete,
but there is a set of documentation
that goes along with OpenPlay.
It is freely downloadable right now.
I believe the version is 2.0.
and David Hill, who are the founders of
Sound and Networking,
are the founders of Sound and Networking.
And there are two sample apps.
I believe MiniPlay and MiniTest
are the two apps that I saw in
there that I was able to look at.
Again, it's all been carbonized,
so they should all just build
and compile right out of the box.
This is going to be the real
meat of our discussion here,
which is BSD Sockets.
It is the standard Unix networking API.
It's available across every
implementation of Unix out there.
The interface itself
has not changed in many,
many years.
However, there have been some supersets
of it made for Windows,
and I thought SGI with Irix had another
implementation of Sockets that had
more of a higher level user interface
to it than Straight Sockets did.
One of the key things about
Sockets is that all of the
functions are synchronous.
They are blocking calls.
Anytime you actually
call one of these things,
you're going to have to
wait until it completes.
As you'll see later on,
with certain functions such as DNS,
when you do get host by
name or get host by address,
you're going to sit there waiting
for a while if you've got some
slow DNS servers in your pathway.
This is sort of how a Sockets
application will look from a high level.
Both the server and client will both call
Socket to create Sockets for themselves.
Sockets are just file descriptors,
is really all they are
across any operating system.
So they're pretty much going
to function the same way any
time you're accessing Sockets.
For a server,
it's important to call bind.
What bind does is bind takes a
local--the local address of the
server and associates it with
that Socket so that any incoming
connections to that server will say,
"Oh, here's the server we're looking for.
Here's the address I want.
You're the one." And that's how a client
and server can establish an association.
The server will then call listen,
as listen is what sets up the socket so
that it will accept incoming connections.
And that, it would be on the client side,
the reference for that would be connect,
where the client actually goes
out over the network and says,
all right,
this is the server I'm looking for,
where are you?
The server that's now in listen
mode will hear that incoming
connection and then provided,
of course,
that the connection is correct and
the server is set up to handle a
connection from that particular client,
it will call accept.
Accept basically tells the server that,
yes, or excuse me,
accept is the server's way of saying,
all right, client, you're good to go,
I'll accept your connection.
Accept will create, as its return value,
it creates a new socket in
a connection-oriented mode.
It would actually create
a new socket that is now
associated with that end of the,
with the incoming client's socket.
So you've now got an
endpoint-to-endpoint connection.
Once you've established that
association between those two sockets,
you're now free to send and receive data
back and forth between client and server.
When you're done,
once all the data has been transmitted
that needs to be transmitted,
both sides call close to
get rid of the socket.
Or excuse me,
that will close the connection
that will not destroy the socket.
How you do that,
I'll show you in a moment.
So how are we going to
initialize the Sockets interface?
Well, CFM Carbon applications are
going to need to load the Sockets
framework through CFBundle.
David showed you how to do
that in the sound portion.
I've also included a URL up
here at the bottom of the page
that if you look for the sample,
call Mako framework,
that will tell you how to load a Mako
framework from a Carbon CFM application.
Mako Carbon Applications,
all you have to do is include the system
framework and it's right in there.
If you wanted access to the
actual--if you wanted to see what
the header files actually look like,
they're in the SIS subfolder of the
system framework and there's SockIO,
Sockets.h and SocketVar.h are the three
header files that you're going to want
to look at mainly if you're curious.
Cocoa applications have two options.
Naturally,
you can use the NSSockets framework,
or you can load the system framework and
access them directly as I just described.
Either way works just as well.
The NSSockets framework, I believe,
is obviously set up for
an Objective-C interface.
So it's really six of one,
half dozen of the other,
depending on which one you want to use.
So creating sockets,
as I mentioned before,
both servers and clients will
need to create sockets in order
to communicate over the network.
Per connection, you need one socket.
Now with multicasting, multihoming,
and a couple of things like UDP,
for instance, you can actually,
because it's a connectionless protocol,
UDP is capable of sending messages
to different hosts on the network.
For instance, with UDP,
if you had four servers
out there and one client,
if all of them were using UDP,
the client would be able to
send a message to server one,
server two, server three,
and server four without establishing
a connection in between all of them
because UDP is a connectionless protocol.
It uses what's called a datagram
that includes in it the,
or as a parameter to the send
function or send to function,
it includes the address of the server
that you want to talk to or the
destination that you want to talk to.
So every time you send a message,
you're telling, "Okay,
I'm sending this one to server one.
Now I'm going to send this one to
server four." That's already included
right there in the send to function.
The socket function returns
a socket descriptor,
as I mentioned earlier.
The socket descriptor is
just a file descriptor.
If you really look at it,
it's just an int.
So, very simple data type.
So how are you going to create sockets?
This is a little-- this code here,
you can use this code directly,
and you'll create
sockets of various types.
The top one is a SOC stream
that's used with the protocol TCP,
which will create a connection-oriented,
data stream-oriented socket.
These are useful for things
like doing file transfers,
if you're going to send
contiguous blocks of data.
So if you wanted to stream audio out,
you'd probably want to use TCP.
TCP is a reliable protocol,
which means it does its error
checking and correcting.
It will do resends.
There is a little caveat to that.
TCP is under no obligation whatsoever to
let you know that it's doing resends or
let you know that it's dropped packets.
So what does that mean?
Well, you can be sending your data
happily to a TCP socket,
and it will be humming along just fine.
The other end won't be
receiving any of it.
You won't know about it,
and neither will they.
All they see is no more
data is coming through.
TCP will just stop resending.
That's it.
That's all you get.
So there's really no way to make TCP/IP,
or excuse me,
TCP tell you that it's now doing
error checking and correcting and
trying to reestablish its connection.
There's no functionality
for that whatsoever,
which means it can be kind
of dangerous to use if you
have real-time critical data.
So what's your option?
UDP.
UDP is connectionless,
but it is unreliable.
What you have to do is implement a
reliability protocol on top of UDP.
Fairly easy to do.
All you have to do is, as you're sending
messages back and forth,
you just make sure that both the client
and server have some method of saying,
all right, I sent a message.
Did you get it?
Client responds, I got the message.
And then you just kind of
loop back and forth on that.
Whenever one of them does
not receive a message,
all you have to do is say, all right,
resend, and you retransmit the same data.
It does require a little bit of work,
although most of the time,
if you're talking about network gaming,
where you really need to be
sending data back and forth,
and it doesn't matter,
if you miss message five and
you're now on message 11,
message five is probably irrelevant
out-of-date information anyway,
so there's no need to resend.
You drop it,
you interpolate between where
you were and where you are,
and you move on.
For instance, that would be for
something like movement.
The last thing is an ICMP, which is
Internet Control Message Protocol.
You would use this for any sort of, well,
Internet Control Message.
Things like pings.
Pings are all done through ICMP.
So establishing connections.
Well, the first thing you need
is you need an address.
And Sockets defines
the SOC ADDR structure,
which has a name, it's got a port,
and an address.
Those are the three things that you
need to establish the association
that you need for a connection.
That applies to both
TCP connection-oriented and
UDP connectionless associations.
Generally speaking,
you're going to need the length too,
which is why you do the
size of the address,
just for the purposes of sending it
to some of the initialization and
sending functions that Sockets has.
You'll see int backlog.
That's used down there
in the listen function,
where when the server calls
listen on a particular socket,
it needs to know how many
connections you want to queue
before it starts dropping them.
If you specify that to zero,
it will process connections
as they come in.
There's only one problem with that,
is that if you're
processing a connection,
if you're in the middle of
then it's not going to be
paying attention to what's
going on in that socket.
So a connection can come in and
it will just automatically drop.
So generally you want to set it
to something like two or three.
If you have an extremely busy server,
you want to set that up higher so it
will actually queue the connections
up and you don't lose any of them.
Bind, right above it,
what bind does is it will
associate the socket address that
you've specified with the socket.
So for a server, what does that mean?
As I said before,
it means that now the server
has an idea of who it is.
So when there's connections coming
in for that specific address,
the server knows that it's referring to
itself and will then continue to call it.
It will continue to accept
incoming connections because
it now has some identity.
You can call bind on the client side.
That's useful for a couple
of different things.
If you have a UDP connection,
you have a UDP connectionless
association,
on a client side,
it's kind of strange because a UDP socket
will accept input from anywhere.
So some random guy on the net sends
a package out that happens to have,
or sends a datagram out that happens
to have your address in it because
they erroneously specified it.
Unless you're locked in,
your client's going to pick that up
and it's going to read that data in.
So how do you prevent
that from happening?
Well, you call bind.
What bind does on the
client side is it says,
"All right, I'm only going to use this
socket to transmit data to and
from this address." It will not
accept data from anywhere else.
It will only accept datagrams
from the address that you specify.
This does not mean that you cannot
re-associate that socket later if,
for instance,
your client wants to communicate
with a couple of different servers.
There's a little more work involved.
You'd have to actually shut down the
connection and destroy the association,
recreate your socket,
and then continue to send or continue
to communicate with a new server.
But it can be done.
So again, onto the Accept function.
This is only used on the server side.
It can be used when you're talking
about a client-server architecture.
If you have a client
that is also a server,
you can use Accept,
although it's usually easier if
you're doing client-server to
just go peer-to-peer as opposed
to having the separation there.
If you don't call Accept, excuse me,
if you call Accept from a server,
it will create a new socket.
So now you're going
to have a wider array.
What you would end up with is you'd end
up with a whole bunch of sockets that
are associated with the same client.
So you'd kind of get this crisscrossed
network that ends up being,
you'd end up with
peer-to-peer at that point.
So Sockets, excuse me,
Accept takes the socket that you want
to accept the incoming connection on.
It accepts, it also takes the address
and the address length.
It will have that information
because when the server receives the
incoming connection from the client,
the incoming address from the client
is actually transmitted to the server.
That's where you will get
that information from.
Now, when the accept function returns,
it does return a new socket.
If you want to communicate with the
client on the other end of that socket,
that is the socket that you use.
The listening socket on the server,
you shouldn't be transmitting more
data on because it's sitting there
just waiting for incoming connections.
So here we'll go through
the connect function.
This is again for connection oriented.
For UDP it's slightly different.
The socket that you pass in there
is the client's local socket.
The address that you pass in is the
address that you want to connect to,
not the address of the client.
I suppose you could connect to yourself
if you wanted to do a loopback,
but that would be entirely
application-specific.
You also send it, as I mentioned earlier,
the address length.
This is one of those
functions that requires that.
It needs to know how much data
you're actually passing into it.
Connect only returns--Connect does not
return anything but error codes that
will return zero if no error occurs.
You can use getLastError, I believe,
will give you the last
socket error that occurred.
You have to be careful with
that because that's not updated.
It's only updated when an error occurs.
So if you call getLastError,
if--when a function returns zero,
you get the last error
that actually occurred.
One of the little caveats about
Connect is that Connect assigns the
local address if you don't call bind.
Normally that's fine.
Unless you wanted to assign
your client a different address,
there wouldn't be much
of a problem with that.
The reason that it doesn't do this,
I believe, is for when you wanted to
do dynamic address updating.
That's getting way, way off topic.
That's not something I want to go into.
So sending and receive data.
You've got a couple of
different functions.
For connection-oriented sockets,
you'll be using send and receive.
There's also two other functions
that are send to and receive from.
Those are mainly used with UDP because
one of their parameters is the address
that you want to communicate to or from.
With a connection-oriented socket,
both functions perform identically.
There's no difference.
You're simply passing in an address,
but you've already got a connection.
The connection that's established is
already associated with that address,
so the extra input is just discarded.
You can use both of them synonymously
with a connection-oriented socket,
GCP, streaming.
which is usually not a bad
idea if you're going to be
changing protocols on the fly.
You should probably use
send to and receive from.
There's slightly more
overhead involved with them,
but it's not significant
enough to worry about.
So as parameters, send takes the socket
that you want to send on.
For a client, that would be the only
socket that it has.
For a server, that would be the socket
for a streaming server,
for a TCP server,
that would be the socket that
is associated with a client
you want to communicate with.
If you have a wide array of
clients and you want to broadcast
a message to all of them using TCP,
you'd have to iterate through each
socket and send the same data on
each socket before you could move on.
It also takes a pointer to a buffer,
which is just a buffer of
bytes that it will read in and
splatter out on the network.
Bytes is the byte count.
That's how many bytes of data
are in the buffer at the time.
And you just pass that along with
any flags that you might have.
Flags are not terribly important.
Only if you're going to be sending
things like out-of-band data,
which is beyond the
scope of this discussion,
is flags really important.
Most of the time you can just pass zero.
Receive, on the other hand,
is the socket that you want
to receive the data on.
Again, for a server,
you're going to have to iterate through
all of the sockets that you've created
with Accept in order to get all of the
data that's incoming from the clients,
which can be kind of slow.
This is why it's recommended
that for real-time games,
for real-time data like that,
you want to use UDP.
It gives the server one socket
that it has to read data in on.
Granted, the buffer is large,
but you can read data in a lot faster
from a single large buffer than
you can from 300 buffers having to
loop through each one and call the
same data input routines every time.
Receive takes the same number
of parameters and the same
kinds of parameters as send.
The receive buffer, however,
is not a pointer to the
buffer that the data is in.
It is a pointer to the buffer that
the data will be transferred into.
If you do not have a data buffer that
is large enough to accommodate the data,
this function will fail.
It will come back with the,
forget the error message
that it fails with,
but it fails with something similar
to your data buffer is not big enough,
so reallocate it.
To get around that, you can do a,
if you pass in as one
of the flags to receive,
I think that you can
pass in message peak,
which will tell you exactly
how much data is in the buffer.
So you can do that before you
read it in every time and allocate
your buffer dynamically like that.
So shutdown and cleanup.
All these functions take, or close,
close just shuts down the socket.
That's all it does.
And it just accepts,
it only takes as a parameter the
socket that you want to close.
Very simple.
Shutdown, on the other hand,
is a little more in-depth.
With shutdown,
you can tell it what you want to do
with any residual data that's remaining
on the send or receive buffers.
A lot of times you'll want to
flush and clear any residual data.
You want to get those
last few bytes in or out.
So you want to use shutdown.
A lot of times,
the extra control that Shutdown
does offer is quite useful.
I call Shutdown in my network
applications more often than
I just simply call Close.
Your port number is going to be
assigned based on your address.
Both of them are actually
going to clear your port.
Once the socket is closed or shut down,
that will free the
So a few little tips
and tricks for Mac OS X.
For open transport applications,
what can you do?
I know there's a lot of existing open
transport applications out there.
So there's two options.
You can use the OT shim that's there.
It does work.
But your other option is to
port it directly to sockets.
As I said, OT on X sits right on
top of the sockets layer,
and you do incur about a 10%
performance hit to use OT as opposed
to going directly to sockets.
I'm going to go through a couple
of slides in a moment that will
show you how OT maps to sockets if,
in fact, you do want to port your
OT app to sockets directly.
For Windows and Unix applications,
Unix apps are going to be pretty
much a straightforward port.
I don't think there's any
semantic differences between our
implementation of sockets and
the standard Unix implementation.
Winsock applications,
there are some notable differences
which I will go through momentarily.
And there's also Direct Play applications
which aren't going to really
translate across to anything,
but I can give you some suggestions
as to where you might want to look.
So using OTCM is again
the easy way onto 9,
or from 8 and 9 onto 10.
Porting to sockets would
be my recommendation.
So how are you going to do that?
Well, here's some of the,
on the left-hand side of this slide,
you'll see some of the
Open Transport Functions.
On the right,
you'll see their sort of brother
that lives in Sockets Land.
So OT endpoint,
that's just a socket as far
as we're concerned here.
Bind and connect,
map over to bind and connect for
sockets for an active OT connection.
Now I'm not exactly sure
what the difference is.
I'm not really an OT guy.
These two obviously map pretty
well right over to Sockets.
So for sending data, again,
there's an extra send,
which is send message,
which is datagram-oriented.
It's a function call that
I'm not too familiar with.
I tend to stick to send
and send to myself.
But I'm assuming that they're going to be
fairly simple and probably more similar
to send to than they would be to send.
That is, they take the address parameter
and they'll take probably
the length of the address,
I would assume.
And receiving is the same way.
So disconnecting and cleaning up.
As I said, you can use Shutdown.
One of the interesting things about
this is the SetSockOp SO Linger.
What exactly does that do?
Setting that SOC option, S-O-L-I-N-G-E-R,
means that the socket is going to stick
around until you actively close it.
and until any remaining data is
read or received from that socket.
That's just all it means.
As opposed to if you simply
called shut down or close,
you can actually just kill it right
there and not read any of the data in.
So I mentioned before a little
something about synchronous operations.
These two functions,
getHostByName and getHostByAddress,
they're both blocking functions,
which means that they're going to
stall until they actually get a return.
There's a way around that,
which is by placing these in their own
threads and letting that thread go off
and wait however long it wants to while
you continue with your application.
That's the recommended way of
emulating async mode on Mac OS X or
on any Sockets implementation,
for that matter.
Another point to note about
these is you can't cancel them.
So once you go in, there's no going back.
You've got to wait until it finishes.
So with Direct Play,
Direct Play is obviously
specific to Windows directly.
There's no other API like it out there,
say for something like NetSprocket that
is kind of the same high-level type API.
You can port Direct Play to NetSprocket.
I'll be perfectly honest with you,
I've never looked into doing that,
so I don't know how much
work would be involved,
but I would assume that it's probably
not going to be the easiest thing to do,
but it is an option if you're
willing to go down that path.
Winsock is much more interesting.
Winsock mostly maps
onto Sockets directly.
By mostly, I mean that there are some
functions in Winsock that are
specific to Winsock itself.
So what are the differences?
Sockets has no
asynchronous functionality.
I just mentioned before how to
deal with that little caveat.
There are also no predefined startup or
shutdown routines because they're not
necessary on Mac OS X or on any Sockets
implementation aside from Windows,
I believe.
Like WSA Startup, WSA Cleanup,
WSA Async Select is another one that's
used a lot to generate the asynchronous
message modes that Winsock uses.
None of these things are available.
and David Hill,
are not part of the standard Sockets API,
which is the standard
cross-platform Sockets API.
They are only available on Windows.
Any functions that are
prefixed by the WSA,
those are all specific to Windows itself.
So if you're looking for
cross-platform compatibility,
those are things that you'll
want to try to use less.
The last bullet on this
slide is kind of interesting.
Windows defines a data type of socket,
all uppercase.
The standard socket data
type is just an int,
it's a file descriptor.
So why does Windows redefine the socket?
That's a good question.
Because I don't rightly know.
I do know that it causes
a lot of problems,
Oak, because when I was first
writing network applications,
I was using the socket data type very
heavily until I found out that you can
just cast an int to the same thing,
and it still works.
Yet,
I don't have to go through the effort
of recoding every time I move my
Windows code to another platform.
So just one of those
little interesting tidbits.
I stay away from the socket definition.
So kind of as a summary,
I went through the networking
technologies that are
available on Mac OS X.
Those include OpenTransport,
which is fully carbonized,
OpenPlay and NetSprocket, again,
which are carbonized and
are also open source.
And I also went through
Sockets in relative detail.
I went through the initialization
of it and how to set up your Sockets
application and kind of give you a
general idea of how a client-server
application is going to work.
Went through some of the little tips,
tricks, and caveats for networking
on Mac OS X and bringing your
network applications to OS X.
And one of the more important things was
illustrating the differences between an
API such as Winsock that is specific to
the Windows platform and the Sockets API,
which is a standard Unix definition.
So for a little more
information on networking,
there's two series of books that
I would highly recommend to anybody
who's very interested in networking.
The top one is Unix
Network Programming by Stevens.
Excellent series of books.
The first one, Volume 1,
goes into a lot of detail about how the
networking subsystem operates on Unix.
It goes into the whole basis for TCPIP,
and there's a lot of
great information in it.
Volume 2 is more about
inter-process communication,
which is using sockets as pipes for
talking between applications on the
same server or on different servers.
The TCP/IP series,
it's called Internetworking
with TCP/IP by Comer,
is another great series on networking.
The first one is the
principles and practices,
the second one is...
Anybody know?
I don't remember.
Actually,
I don't remember what two and three are.
But they're really good, I know that.
Because I own them all.
There's also some things that some...
Mailing lists.
That one escaped me for a moment.
There's three mailing lists
in particular at Apple that
are maintained at Apple that
you'll want to look at if you're
interested in more networking stuff.
The Open Play Developers List.
That one obviously relates
specifically to Open Play and
that open source project.
Not terribly active, but it seems to be
generating more interest now.
The Open Transport Developers List.
I'm not sure how active that is.
As I said,
I'm not really an open transport guy.
From what I understand,
it's still pretty busy.
Then there's also the
Darwin Developers List.
Make sure you have a lot of room on
your hard drive if you're downloading
this list because it is busy.
Probably on the order
of 100 messages a day.
That's where a lot of the kernel level
networking stuff gets discussed if you
really want to delve that deeply into it.
So my roadmap,
well it's not really a roadmap
because it refers to everything that
happened in the beginning of the week.
But I put it up here just for anybody
who wants to reference the sessions
once the DVDs finally come out.
300 was the networking overview.
You might recognize some of the
content from one or two of my
slides from the 300 session.
We kind of had the same things there.
The extensible kernel
networking services,
again that's going to be more
for people who are interested
in the Darwin development stuff
and the kernel level stuff.
Networking configuration mobility,
that's more user level network
configuration as opposed to
programmatic network configuration.
Network services location.
I don't remember what that one was about.
Oh, check it out on the DVD.
Somebody let me know.
And AFP is 3.0 and
Apple Share is just that.
It's AFP on Mac OS X.